this is going to be a somewhat brief but
deep video about political science I
think that the whole sphere of politics
is really still being haunted by this
question of centralization and
decentralization and it's haunted by it
partly because it was a major point of
political contention about twenty years
ago but it remain in this strange gray
area where it was never really examined
properly by economics as a discipline
like as a discipline alone it's also
never really handled by politics as a
discipline it's in this dangerous gray
area where it's partly within the domain
of economics but the economists don't
really want to think seriously about the
political and ethical aspects and then
it's partly in the domain of politics
where everyone is inclined to lie in
their self-interest so in the
discussions about Bernie Sanders and his
proposed transformation of the American
healthcare system one of the questions
being asked is could Bernie Sanders
really achieve a dramatically more
efficient system in America through the
reforms he's proposing could he achieve
greater efficiency through any method
other than lowering the salaries of
doctors and nurses there is pause
efficiency is not the only consideration
here right efficiency is one
consideration fairness is another
consideration if you want to take the
position that you know what it's okay if
the American healthcare system becomes
less efficient like it can cost more
money and so on if poor people are
really able to have equal access to
cancer treatment along with rich people
that morally that's an objective so
important that that's that's going to
justify some inefficiency so very often
in politics efficiency is not the most
important thing poor people in rural
areas do they have access to the same
quality of education as rich people in
major cities
if you want to provide that you're gonna
have to embrace a certain level of
inefficiency and and that's that's okay
you can decide democratically even
though that's good that's something else
is you're already other than efficiency
however politically right now Bernie
Sanders is encouraging Americans to
imagine that through the centralization
of medical services of medical
administration and of health insurance
sort of exists as a shadow of the
medical system I mean you could say he
wants to eliminate the health insurance
industry or he could say he wants to
centralize all the charts you can
express enough ways but basically
through centralization trillions of
dollars will be saved in greater
efficiency now again one really brief
thing I need to pause to clarify in my
earlier video I showed you on Stewart
screen just how astronomical the average
wages for American doctors were primary
care doctors and also specialists in a
Germany right now the average salary for
a nurse is thirty-eight thousand six
hundred dollars these are US dollars
Germany is not a third world country
Germany is not providing medicine at
third world standards Germany is an
affluent first world country with
generally people consider to have
excellent health care or at least very
good health care the nurses are being
paid thirty eight thousand six hundred
dollars in average salary okay in the
United States of America the equivalent
average is seventy three thousand five
hundred so nurses making seventy two
thousand five hundred now I think that
that average is kind of low if you break
it down category by category you get
much much higher numbers so you know if
you look at sorry
the term nurse covers a wide range of
things are you looking at registered
nurses or you looking at nurse
practitioners and the different states
have
within the united states different
regions have different definitions so
it's a little bit complex
however yeah a nurse in California is
likely to make over 100 thousand US
dollars I have one friend who is a nurse
in California he says everyone is making
a hundred thousand or one hundred and
fifty thousand dollars in up as a nurse
out there again his definition of nurse
I think he's not including the less
qualified nurses who just work in
retirement homes so it's a little it's a
little bit complicated nevertheless my
point is here
the most obvious way the United States
of America could achieve greater
efficiency in health care would be
dramatically reducing the salaries being
paid to doctors and nurses so as soon as
Bernie Sanders creates this federal
government system of providing health
care there will be the temptation for
whoever is in charge of the government
to save money by providing doctors and
nurses with a salary that is similar to
the salaries paid in France paid in
Germany paid in countries other than the
United States of America right and of
course the same question is also being
asked about pharmaceuticals drugs why
should Americans pay more than people
pay for the same drugs in other
countries well the question deserves to
be asked why should they pay more for
doctors and nurses for the labor that
they do in other countries and that
that's gonna have profound political
patients so the ghost haunting
mainstream political discourse here is
the question of what advantage is to be
gained from centralization itself and I
think the best example I can give you
here is imagine the beer industry all
right let's imagine the beer industry in
a medium-sized country like Japan and
throughout Japan there are little craft
breweries okay so there are little small
privately owned businesses scattered
around and then let's say there are also
sort of medium sized factories
throughout Japan producing beer for this
whole population let's say someone
decides to run for government with the
promise if they are elected they will
real
organize the beer industry to be
centralized and achieve greater
efficiency they're looking at the beer
industry and say look there's this whole
mess of little local privately owned
companies doing this and beer is much
too expensive the whole process is much
too inefficient fundamentally be a
bottle of beer should be just as cheap
as buying a bottle of soda pop or a
bottle of water
let's centralize this whole industry
into just a few enormous highly
efficient factories and then the price
of beer will drop dramatically there'll
be greater efficiency achieved through
economies of scale through
centralization itself now I'm using this
example because I think it's very easy
in this case for people to imagine step
by step to think through what are the
advantages of centralization and what
are the advantages of decentralization
and why is it that in most countries
that drink beer like Germany or like the
United States you actually have a
mixture of a centralized and
decentralized beer production right so
there are smaller companies that
generally charge a higher price that
produce beer locally and that will
generally have more variety and more
innovation again it's important to keep
in mind here there's a sense in which
beer hasn't changed in 1,000 years right
and yet if you're someone who cares
about beer I'm not I don't drink alcohol
but you know it's advertising surrounds
me I'm aware that small craft breweries
are coming up with new ways to make beer
and new flavors of beer and new ideas
they're innovating and responding to
local interests they're producing new
products and finding new markets and so
on all the time on a tiny scale there
are these craft breweries taking these
kinds of risks also of course craft
breweries they don't have to transport
their goods over such a huge distance
right they may have a local clientele
and they can produce for that so on and
so forth whereas if you have one huge
factory in one location then you need an
army of truck drivers to distribute the
beer and beer beer
bad the passage of time matters for beer
doesn't go bad as rapidly as something
like baked bread or something but
nevertheless how you transport beer the
temperature you keep it at in the
passage of time those things all matter
to so what you normally end up with
under free market conditions so to speak
is not the dominance of the centralised
mass manufacturing model but you have
both in competition with each other and
each has its own advantages and
disadvantages however let's go back to
Japan and say we have this political
party that's promising you
they will dramatically reduce the cost
of beer by centralizing it into one
system one public sector sector system
the same way Bernie Sanders wants to
centralize the medical care all right
what would be the savings fundamentally
bottle by bottle and leader by leader if
you're gonna provide the same number of
millions of people with beer you're
going to be facing the same costs
whether you manufacture that beer on a
large scale or a small scale right on a
centralized manner or in a decentralized
manner if what you want to do is provide
medical services which again for the
most parts this is doctors Consulting
face-to-face with people who have the
flu and taking their temperature and
taking stool samples and doing medical
tests and giving them advice and giving
them prescriptions you know this kind of
thing again and again that face to face
interaction with a doctor the doctor
taking your temperature and checking
your blood pressure these kinds of
routine things there isn't some kind of
dramatic increase in efficiency by
having an enormous Hospital centralized
in one location and centralized
administrative Lea under one
government's control that were one giant
corporations control for that matter
doesn't matter as opposed to many small
competing locally owned hospitals
doctor's offices for-profit medical
services soon and so forth there isn't
there isn't any self-evident savings in
in inefficiency there right now again in
a sense with brewing beer and putting
beer into bottles even though I'm sure
there is some savings in terms of having
larger and more efficient equipment you
could say that about hospitals - at a
hospital the way people share equipment
the way people perform medical tests and
so on as opposed to a small doctor's
office needing to send the stool sample
to a lab to have the tests done and have
it sent back there are going to be some
savings there but leader for a leader in
terms of the ingredients that go into a
beer and pound for pound what-have-you
there isn't some kind of obvious
dramatic savings when you centralize as
opposed to having decentralized services
except the cost of labour when you
centralize the manufacturing of beer
into one giant factory you get anonymous
faceless factory employees all right
and then the corporation can pay these
people minimum wage they can pay them
almost nothing and they can replace them
very easily and say hey you don't matter
us the small locally owned brewery it's
very likely to be kind of one guy who
started the business and his wife may be
his wife and his son and maybe they have
two employees they are almost inevitably
going to pay themselves higher wages the
business really exists for them they
don't regard themselves as nameless
faceless easily replaceable employees
right the centralization of medical
services and the centralization of a
factory production it's partly just a
kind of change in social perspective
that comes about with central planning
and the pursuit of greater efficiency it
almost always connects to paying lower
wages right and again if you imagine
yourself in the position of the
president the United States of America
you would then be asking yourself why
would you pay
doctors and nurses in the United States
so much more than they're being paid in
France or Germany and you of a
responsibility as the president at
states to use taxpayers money
responsibly so on and so forth right
you're not administering this
centralized bureaucracy for the benefit
of the doctors or the nurses right so I
mean likewise again if you were the
government in Japan and they take over
the beer industry and centralize the
beer industry they're then looking at
that from this centralized authoritarian
perspective and saying well our job is
to produce a large quantity of beer at
the lowest prices possible why should we
pay these people more or we can pay the
minimum wage it's the same as any other
factory job and that's it and what you
lose is the small amount of innovation
that comes about with the locally owned
small craft beer factory again I'm not
glorifying this but you know there's
some guy who sits around and says okay
let's come up with a new beer for this
summer or this winter and they design a
new label and they come up with a new
gimmick I remember there was a beer
company in Canada that decided they were
gonna they were gonna have coffee
flavored beer this was gonna be the new
thing and that kind of innovation
probably fails nine times out of ten no
they come up with new ideas but I mean
the the people are being paid more
I'm not even presuming these are
tremendously brilliant and in a fit of
people but they do sit around trying to
innovate trying to make the most out of
out of their little local brewery and
the hope is the dream is that with
decentralization you're gonna get more
innovation of one kind or another
um now again I'm using both examples
here because I'm not wildly optimistic
about that I don't think it's the case
that a decentralized medical system
results in you having amazing new
innovations in how doctors treat heart
attacks it may it may well result in a
better kind of quality of service for
people I've seen that in contrasting the
Canadian healthcare systems the American
healthcare system I'm amazed at how good
the human relations are the service
element of the American healthcare
system is because what I'm used to is
the socialist system can
mmm so just in the last couple of years
because I have an American girlfriend
I've been back and forth across that
board I'm really surprised how well the
American health care system works on
that side but that's I mean that's just
sort of how it caters to the individual
client which I guess you can say is
what's happening in the beer industry
also that doesn't represent greater
efficiency and it doesn't in and of
itself represent a kind of greater
quality of service if by quality you
mean the real health outcomes like
actually saving people's lives are
actually performing a better quality of
heart surgery or whatever metric you
want to use to measure that okay so I
think the whole political spectrum less
left and right remains a bit mystified
about the advantages and disadvantages
that are linked to centralization and
decentralization um people I think are
naturally afraid of centralization
because it is opaque it lacks
transparency it lacks public
accountability however the fundamental
advantage of centralization is fairness
if you centralize the education system
then there's really the potential to
provide equal education for all uniform
standards for all just even that we
write the same exam and we're great at
the same way where I feel ok I can
compete with you and I know I'm writing
the same exam you're writing we don't we
have the same opportunity we're great
against the same scale fairness is a
huge fundamental advantage that means
centralization is the way to go with
some types of services some types of
social functions however yes
decentralization gives you a more
responsive more kind of adaptive and
adaptable more innovative you know more
transparent in the sense that local
people more transparent system in the
sense that local people get to go and
scrutinize that doctor's office or that
local beer factory and they have a
choice they say ok I don't
you know I don't like this doctor's
office it looks dirty or it looks poorly
organized I don't like this craft
brewery so I'm gonna choose to go to
another place the more centralization
you have by definition the less choice
you have
so that highly centralized education
system you can't switch schools or even
if you do switch schools the other
school you switch to is exactly the same
as the school you left because it's a
ideally it's a totally centralized
totally uniform system all of the
options are scary all of the
consequences are intimidating but in the
year 2020 the United States finds itself
in such a dire position in terms of the
provision of health care to its people
that they're certainly not risk-averse
the time has come to the United States
of America to try something new I hope
they'll engage in a really sincere
comparative study of what the different
strategies used around the world are in
Europe in Japan here in Taiwan and
they're gonna make a wise choice that
isn't just guided by abstracted e ology
but is guided by a nuanced awareness of
the advantages and disadvantages of
socially provided healthcare as it has
been tried and tested in other countries
around the world